# ORGANIZATIONS

A hunter of the minions of Mythos takes a great  
risk by operating alone. Without a team behind them, he or she has little-to-no back-up or support. When the chips are down, who can they rely on to watch their back, pull them from the burning wreckage of the flaming cult temple, or suck the poison from a deadly snakebite? By working in a team, heroes benefit from the greater range of skills available, as many heads are better than one. More eyes to spot hidden doors, more ears to hear the monsters approaching.

How such teams come together in the pursuit of hunting monsters and villains is important, helping to build a degree of believability for players, and providing access to resources and information.

In this chapter a number of sample pulp hero organizations are outlined; each can be used as is, or adapted to better suit the players’ concept of an organization. Equally, just use the following teams as inspiration, letting the players discuss and work out the kind of organization they want their heroes to belong to. Along with the organizations described here, more can be found in the _Investigator Handbook_.

Naturally, such organizations are not limited to the heroes. Villains in _Pulp Cthulhu_ are often members of cults and secret societies. Just like the heroes working together to thwart the foul machinations of the enemy, evil cabals organize and construct a supporting infrastructure. To this end—and for the Keeper’s eyes only—three villainous organizations are described towards the end of this chapter. As with the hero organizations, these villainous cabals can be slotted directly into your games to provide suitable adversaries, or used to stimulate your own ideas and designs.

SAMPLE HERO  
ORGANIZATIONS

**THE VANGUARD CLUB** The Vanguard Club is an international organization of explorers and adventurers. By the nature of their activities, Vanguard members often encounter manifestations of the Mythos, but tend to consider these incidents in their historical or archaeological context rather than as an indication of a greater supernatural menace.

**Purpose**

The Vanguard Club’s purpose is best summed up by its motto: _Semper primus ad limes_ (“always first to the frontier”). Club members take great pride in being the first to explore an uncharted region or test out a radical scientific device. This isn’t to say that members are merely thrill-seekers and headline-grabbers—though their colleagues in more stodgy scientific circles sometimes dismiss them as such. To be certain, a lack of respect for the niceties of precise record keeping and the finer points of scientific objectivity has tainted some Vanguard discoveries over the years. Despite a few notable scandals, however, Vanguards regularly publish important papers and monographs, and the membership book of many local groups includes noteworthy and respected scientists from diverse fields.

Powering the club’s drive to stand at the forefront of exploration is a belief in humankind’s ability to master their world. The Vanguards hold that it is their responsibility to put this philosophy into action and prove its validity to the rest of society. Thus, they strive to leave civilization’s mark on the most remote reaches of the globe to demonstrate humankind’s dominance over all aspects of nature.

44

**Organization**  
PULP ORGANIZATIONS

By 1920, all locals had admitted women as full members,

Taken as a whole, the Vanguard Club is not so much a single organization as it is a loose affiliation of independent local groups sharing a common belief in the spirit of human achievement. The Vanguards do recognize a headquarters, located in London’s Mayfair district. The original Vanguards first met in these luxurious rooms in 1878, and it was here that the group’s mission statement was drafted. Beyond its significance as the birthplace of the club, however, the London branch has little actual power. Its sole official function is the granting of charters to new clubs. Because the criteria for starting a new branch are so meager, even this authority to grant new charters tends to be viewed as largely symbolic.

To start a local Vanguard Club a sponsor needs only to demonstrate the ability to achieve notable feats in exploration or scientific endeavor, and a belief in the club’s philosophy of human achievement. Each branch is expected to be self

sufficient, so affiliation with a wealthy patron, corporation, or university is encouraged. Until the turn of the century, a statement of political affiliation was also required, with applicants expected to express views in keeping with the founders’ conservatism. Over time, that practice has fallen by the wayside, though the Vanguards as a whole tend to lean to the Right politically.

Once satisfied with the applicant, the London club issues an official charter. The local founder determines the new branch’s organizational structure and membership criteria. In general, the founder names himself president and creates a working committee composed of the first half-dozen members to join. Over time, this structure evolves to fit the membership. Meritocracies are common in the United States, with younger members earning a spot on the ruling committee or even taking the president’s chair as a reward for a particularly astounding adventure. In older branches, such as the Paris club, family name and fortune earn more respect than simple achievement—though even the most blue-blooded member must prove his or her worth from time to time.

Consideration of potential new members is held at regular intervals. In deciding upon base eligibility, the local membership committee assesses a candidate’s individual accomplishments, but also his or her social and financial value to the club. The latter holds more importance to some groups than others. Still, money alone is unlikely to earn membership unless accompanied by some level of achievement, even in the most cash-strapped clubs. If the membership committee deems a candidate worthy, he or she is presented to the general membership for a vote—in some places secret, in others open. A few of the older clubs eschew such democratic voting and reserve the right to decide the fate of new members to the president and ruling committee. Membership in any Vanguard Club gains access to clubs worldwide, though some branches treat such “associate members” with scorn.  
though some clubs remain reluctant to welcome any but the most remarkable female adventurers and inventors. The Vanguard Club’s roots in conservative soil remain evident in the consistent blackballing of any candidate with substantiated communist or anarchist ties. Anti-clerical leanings are common—which is little surprise, given the club’s extreme humanism. Despite the tendency to public atheism, the clubs tend not to deny membership simply because a candidate subscribes to an organized church.

The five oldest Vanguard Clubs—all chartered between 1878 and 1880—can be found in London, Paris, Vienna, Stockholm, and Boston, Massachusetts. These clubs each boast well over one hundred active members, sumptuous club-owned meeting quarters, extensive libraries, and impressive trophy rooms. More typical is the Arkham branch of the Vanguard Club, which averages a mere dozen active members, who meet in modest rented rooms near Miskatonic University. Whereas the Stockholm or Vienna clubs lodge visiting Vanguards in well-appointed rooms within the meeting halls, the Arkham branch billets visitors at the homes of club members or, if arrangements can be made, at the university dormitories.

Regardless of size, each Vanguard Club does whatever it can to assist members (and selected potential members) in the achievement of great deeds and worthwhile adventures. Individual clubs have been known to fund expeditions or experiments, though only the largest branches can afford to do so alone. It is far more common for a local branch to work with a nearby university or research laboratory in staging a specific project.

A committee in each local branch considers requests for support and, after reviewing a formal proposal, presents recommendations to the club president, who decides upon the level of support to be offered. Requests from members find favor over those from non-members, but clubs will generally consider any proposal that furthers the Vanguard Club’s goals and which places the organization and its members at the forefront of exploration. Scientific value is also crucial for any proposal’s success, though pure science holds less allure than an original application or bold idea. The Vanguards are not afraid to be allied with men or women considered “eccentric” in establishment circles, though they will not long tolerate any member or project that makes a laughing stock of the club.

Should a club president decide in favor of a project, one of two levels of Vanguard participation can be offered: If an expedition or experiment is sponsored by a Vanguard Club, it means the local branch has officially endorsed the project on behalf of all Vanguard Clubs everywhere. In addition to the use of the local library and the cooperation of local members, the team of a sponsored project can expect assistance from any Vanguard branch they visit while on project business. Thus, sponsorship grants access to the entire network of club libraries and some of the greatest scientific minds in the world.

45  
CHAPTER 3

s h o o t i n g  
d e e p o n e s

**_The Arkham Vanguard Club by Richard Pace_**  
It should be no surprise, then, that such participation is difficult to secure, even for club members, but once sponsorship is granted it lasts for the entire duration of the project. In return for this high level of assistance, the Vanguards insist upon a contract granting specific control of publicity and publications resulting from the sponsored project. Most petitioners find ceding this control is a small price to pay for the benefits of full Vanguard support.

A local group can also identify an expedition or experiment as one sanctioned by the Vanguard Club. As opposed to full sponsorship, sanction does not extend beyond the local club. Team members for a sanctioned project will be granted reasonable access to the local library and to members’ expertise, but should have no expectations of such cooperation from other branches.

Barring club politics, local sanction is automatically given to any project in which a local member plays a prominent role. A no publicity contract is required for a sanctioned project, though the local Vanguards will turn away any request from someone who has previously accepted assistance but failed to publicize the club’s positive role in their endeavor.

The facilities for all local Vanguard Clubs, whether rented or owned, include a meeting room and a library. The more wealthy clubs also house well-stocked laboratories, large dining halls, impressive trophy rooms, suites for the use of visiting or

46

local club members in need of temporary accommodations, and halls for the presentation of public lectures. All branches are expected to sponsor local lectures by traveling Vanguards or other speakers, in keeping with the club philosophy. No matter how large the branch, though, the library invariably serves as the cynosure of club life.

A typical Vanguard library contains several hundred volumes, with the selection heavily skewed toward obscure historical and scientific non-fiction. Atlases and maps form the core of the library’s reference collection, with language guides and dictionaries a close second. Vanguard members donate copies of their own published works to the local chapter, as well as to the libraries of the five oldest clubs. Local libraries also serve as an archive for members’ unpublished papers, correspondence, notebooks, and maps, as well as similar items from sponsored or sanctioned projects.

Such unique material makes a Vanguard library especially helpful to adventurers or scientists. The private logs often hold practical details that are invaluable—what tribes to trust or distrust in remote jungles, lists of supplies used on previous expeditions, suppliers of esoteric scientific equipment friendly to Vanguard projects, and so on. The private journals also hold the details of failed adventures and botched experiments; material the Vanguards have never released to the public. The clubs control access to these materials carefully, and  
PULP ORGANIZATIONS

non-members are only allowed to view such items after signing agreements never to disclose the details. Researchers open to the possibility of powers greater than humankind have often found clear indications of Mythos encounters in these chronicles, even if the Vanguard’s philosophy prevents them from admitting any such possibilities.

Researchers are unlikely to find any Mythos tomes of substantial power lurking on the shelves of a Vanguard library. The sole exception to this is the Arkham branch. Because of the club’s proximity to Miskatonic University, the possibility of access to Mythos tomes is high.

Although most Vanguard Club libraries do not offer direct access to tomes, they house quite a lot of information that can aid investigators or adventurers in Mythos encounters. Because of this, both pro-Mythos and anti-Mythos groups frequently attempt to plant spies in the Vanguard ranks. Investigators who do not make their queries at the local club discreetly could find themselves the recipients of unwelcome attention from cultists (or worse).

**History**

The legend of the Vanguard Club’s founder, Frederick Gustavus Burnaby, looms large over the organization, even in the 1930s. Born in Leicestershire in 1842, Burnaby eventually stood six foot four, with a forty-seven-inch chest, and was renowned for such feats of strength as carrying a small pony under one arm. Despite his imposing bulk, he could also cleanly vault the billiard table in the officers’ mess of his regiment. But it was not merely for his physical prowess that Burnaby is remembered.

In his time, Frederick Burnaby made a name for himself as a world traveler, soldier, journalist, linguist, and balloonist. As a young officer, he set off on an unofficial mission across Asia to the exotic city of Khiva to spy on the Russians, who had captured the remote slave-center two years earlier. He reached the city, only to be met with a frantic message from his commander to return as quickly as possible from this unapproved jaunt into enemy territory. His account of this journey, _A Ride to Khiva_ (1876) became a best seller, as did a follow-up, (1877), which detailed his equally dangerous winter expedition from Constantinople through eastern Turkey.

At other times, Burnaby journeyed to Central and South America and took part in an expedition with Charles “Chinese” Gordon that followed the Nile as far as the equator. He fought in several battles on the Russo-Turkish front and in the Sudan, and it was there that he finally died, in 1885, while attempting to relieve his old friend General Gordon at Khartoum. Though Burnaby’s corpse was never recovered, popular accounts at the time had it that more than a thousand dead Mahdists shared the final resting place of Burnaby and his seventy-three fallen comrades.

The Vanguard Club was born of one of Burnaby’s few notable failures. Returning to England in 1878, after commanding the Fifth Turkish Brigade against the Russians,  
he took up politics. Running on an ultra-conservative platform of industrial protection for Britain and military law for Ireland, he contested the Birmingham Conservative seat but was defeated. During a consolation party with some friends in London, someone suggested that the soldier and adventurer deserved a better class of comrades than mere politicians. Impulsive as always, Burnaby took up the suggestion and set about drafting the charter of the London Vanguard Club.

By 1880, clubs had been established in Paris, Vienna, Stockholm, and Boston, Massachusetts. Notable early members included General Charles “Chinese” Gordon, and such noteworthy African explorers as Gustav Nachtigal (who crossed and recrossed the Sahara and Sudan in 1869), and the famous and controversial Henry M. Stanley. Later members sometimes lacked the impressive credentials of Gordon or Stanley, but they always embodied the spirit or philosophy of the club. Of these “adventuresome celebrities” invited into the ranks, the most famous were heavyweight boxing champion John L. Sullivan, and the novelist and poet Rudyard Kipling.

The Vanguards took an active role in the race for the North and South Poles. Carsten Borchgrevink was already a member when, in 1895, he made the first confirmed landing on the mainland of Antarctica. Vanguard funds and sponsorship helped Borchgrevink to return to Antarctica three years later, where he established the record for southerly travel. R.F. Scott and Ernest Shackleton both enjoyed Vanguard support for their expedition, though Roald Amundsen refused the group’s help when he set off for the South Pole in 1911\. The reason for Amundsen’s clash with the Vanguards remains a mystery.

The club also welcomes inventors. Nikola Tesla, dirigible pioneer Ferdinand von Zeppelin, and bathysphere creator Charles William Beebe have all belonged to the club and benefited from some sort of support in their endeavors. Most often, this support takes the form of fellow Vanguards willing to be the first to test out their inventions. In return, the club gets positive publicity and unusual access to the knowledge and laboratories of these creative pioneers.

The club has also suffered its share of embarrassments due to its connection with inventors since more than one highly publicized invention backed by the Vanguards has failed to develop as promised. Such was the case with the early flying machine designed by the Austrian Wilhelm Kress. A longtime member of the Vienna club, Kress spent twenty years perfecting the design, and from 1890 to 1901, when the plane was finally ready for a test flight, he enjoyed full Vanguard sponsorship. On the maiden flight, however, the seaplane—the first piloted plane to use an internal combustion engine—skipped on the water once before crashing and sinking into a reservoir. At the time of the crash, the Wright Brothers’ flight at Kitty Hawk was a full two years away. Had the project succeeded, the Vanguards would have gained substantial glory and Kress would have secured a place in aviation history. Instead, the spectacular nature of the failure caused the Vanguards to withdraw support from

47  
CHAPTER 3

s  
h  
o  
o  
t  
i  
n  
g  
d  
e  
e  
p  
o  
n  
e  
s

48  
several inventions and downplay much of their involvement with inventors between 1900 and 1920\. Kress’ failure also made some scientists wary of involving themselves with the club. After the wreckage was salvaged, Kress discovered the plane’s Daimler engine was twice as heavy as the one he had ordered. Both Kress and the Vanguards suspected foul play perpetrated by Russian agents. Though nothing was ever proved, several inventors distanced themselves from the club in the wake of the accident, for fear of similar sabotage.

In recent years, the memory of the Kress embarrassment has faded and scientists once again ally with the Vanguards regularly. In 1917, the old animosity toward the Russians transformed overnight into a loathing of the Soviets. Yet the Soviet government’s stance on religion as a danger to humanity and the importance of scientific progress have won over some within the membership. Others denounce the Communist regime as even more dangerous than the Tsar and his minions. While no club has been chartered in the Soviet Union, at least not as of 1933, it seems possible that one could be started there by the close of the decade. Fred Burnaby would not be pleased.

**The Arkham Vanguard Club**

The Arkham Vanguard Club was founded in 1890 by German immigrant Hans Gottering, whose exploration of South America had garnered very positive press in both Europe and America. Prior to chartering the Arkham club, Gottering was well known to the Boston branch, but personal clashes with several important committee members had ruined his chances of joining there. With his achievements in South America and his close ties to Miskatonic University, which seemed ready to help fund future treks, Gottering easily won a charter from the London club.

The Arkham club’s early years proved to be disastrous. In 1892, Gottering staged an expedition to South America. Though the expedition suffered no fatalities, a mysterious sickness struck the entire group, forcing a hasty retreat from the jungle. During the grueling trek back to base camp, a fever-wracked Gottering was separated from the party when unfriendly natives staged an ambush. The explorer spent several days wandering in the wild, where he glimpsed what he described in his notebooks as “a temple of almost unearthly beauty.” A search party finally discovered Gottering, unconscious but alive, and carried him to the base camp. When he finally regained consciousness, neither his rescuers nor the locals could confirm his sighting of the temple.

Visions of the strange temple haunted Gottering. As president and founder of the Arkham club, he staged Vanguard sponsored expeditions back to the jungles in 1893 and 1894\. On the latter trip, he discovered a previously unrecorded village of native people near the suspected temple site. These reclusive hunter-gatherers related several unsettling tales, which had been passed from generation to generation, of a cursed and time-lost temple, but such stories did not help him locate the actual site.

On the day before their departure from the village, Gottering staged one last foray into the wild. What happened next is a matter of some speculation, for Gottering’s journals are uncharacteristically silent on the matter. All anyone knows for certain is that the party met with some disaster, with Gottering alone returning from the jungle, raving and spattered with blood.

Only one member of the Arkham club, botanist Dr. Homer Winside, had excused himself from the expedition. It became his task now to retrieve his deranged colleague and whatever remained of the expedition’s notes and equipment. Upon returning to the States, Winside committed Gottering to the local sanitarium and helped the authorities conduct an investigation. Only intercession by some influential members of the Boston club, who disliked Gottering, but wished to shield the Vanguards’ reputation, prevented the police from charging the madman with murder. A few cryptic entries in expedition journals were generously interpreted to indicate treacherous locals, and the case was closed.

For two years Winside held the distinction of being the sole member of Arkham’s Vanguard Club, though he spent far more time on his teaching and research at the university than he did promoting the organization. Soon, however, others joined. Anthropologist Laban Shrewsbury belonged to the club for many years, before his disappearance in 1915\. Chester Armwright, always an avid hunter, joined while a medical student at Miskatonic just after the turn of the century, and renewed his membership when he returned to Arkham as dean of the medical school in the 1920s. Dr. William Dyer, head of the natural sciences program at M.U., had been asked to join the Vanguard several times since arriving in Arkham. Dyer finally accepted, in the hope of gaining access to Vanguard resources and experience, when it became clear he was to head the university’s expeditions to the Antarctic and Western Australia.

The current president of the Arkham club is Dr. Ernest McTavish, chair of the Archaeology Department. Other important members include Professor Woodbridge of the School of Applied Science, who has used Vanguard funds for his experiments in rocketry; archaeologist and adventurer Dr. Francis Morgan; and Professor Abram Bethnell, the club’s resident anthropologist and steadfast cynic in matters relating to the supernatural and the Mythos. Though retired from the university and the Vanguards, Homer Winside retains an honorary position on the club’s committee. His shop on South Garrison Street, Almen’s Flowers, is often frequented by club members asking questions pertaining to botany or the local history of the Vanguards.

The initial meetings of the Arkham club were held in various private residences, university offices, and restaurants. Gottering, who served as the group’s first president, soon decided upon some modest rooms at 431 West Saltonstall Street as the club’s permanent home. The apartment’s sitting room serves as the club’s meeting room and trophy hall. For the first decade of the club’s existence, one of the two small  
PULP ORGANIZATIONS

bedrooms was reserved for visiting Vanguards. By 1900, both bedrooms had been taken over by the club’s library, and visitors were billeted in either private homes or university dormitories, depending upon need and availability. The Vanguards have a long-term lease on the Saltonstall Street rooms and hope some day to buy the whole building.

The Arkham club’s library contains a wide variety of books but is especially strong in the areas of Massachusetts and Miskatonic Valley lore, South American geography, and, thanks to the influence of Homer Winside, botany. The journals and maps for all of Gottering’s expeditions, as well as his personal diaries, are housed here. Over the years, many fans of sensational crimes have tried to purchase or even steal these volumes, so the Vanguards are particularly wary of granting access to them. Cataloging for the collection is a bit haphazard, and the Vanguards do not possess an exhaustive index. However, Dr. Henry Armitage, director of the Miskatonic University’s Orne Library, has a personal listing of the books housed there that is surprisingly complete. How he created or gained such a list is unknown, but Armitage’s catalog notes two Mythos tomes of interest in the Vanguard Library: an 1801 edition of _Thaumaturgical Prodigies in the New England Canaan_, and an imperfect handwritten copy of Winter-Hall’s _Eltdown Shards_ containing no spells. Armitage’s catalog also notes that a badly preserved paw in the club’s trophy room does not belong to a polar bear, as labeled, but to an immature gnoph-keh.  
**DEPARTMENT 29**

Throughout the 1920s, the Bureau of Investigation was primarily concerned with the investigation of criminals of the Prohibition era, as well as the resurgence of white supremacy movements like the Klu Klux Klan. The organization was relatively small with limited powers. With the appointment of 26-year-old J. Edgar Hoover in 1924 the organization began to change and by 1935 Hoover had effectively rebuilt the Bureau into a larger, more capable crime-fighting agency. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) was born.

In 1928, an FBI operation focused on an unusual religious cult in the decaying seaport of Innsmouth, Massachusetts, caused Hoover to question whether other, similar, cults were flourishing in the forgotten corners of the United States. Seeing the potential for such cults to undermine the American way of life, Hoover set about appointing a small task force to look into the matter; their chief remit was to ascertain whether a real and credible threat existed.

By 1932, Hoover’s cult task force believed it had an answer. Since the Innsmouth raid, the task force had spent its time researching related and similar organizations to that of the Esoteric Order of Dagon—the cult at the heart of the Innsmouth troubles. Visiting states from the east to west coasts, three agents sifted through endless police reports, visited crime scenes, and interviewed many witnesses. Isolated fragments of a larger picture began to emerge. Hoover was right. Across America there were, what seemed to be, a small number of cult-like groups, acting either as religious or benevolent organizations but which were clearly covers for criminal and morally dubious activities. While the evidence was patchy, to say the least, it was credible. Hoover decided to act, and Department 29 came into being.

**Operating Remit**

With the majority of the Bureau’s manpower and resources already committed to fighting organized crime and anti trust violations, a small team of agents was established with a limited budget. Department 29, as it was officially known, held the remit to research and investigate possible cult terrorist threats. The remit was intentionally broad as the full scale of any danger was still unknown. An inherent component of the Department’s job would be to assess just how far the cult threat was spread. While the initial research had suggested that the majority of organizations suspected of cult activity were small and isolationist, some intriguing pieces of evidence pointed to possible lines of communication between such groups. The fear was that the small cults could join together in some form of unholy alliance, working together to infiltrate and corrupt the heartland of America.

Operating from the New York Field Office, Department 29 is able to access the full range of FBI resources, from the national fingerprint library to the forensic science criminal investigation laboratory at the FBI’s headquarters in Washington D.C. The full membership is rarely all together in New York, though, as teams of agents can usually be found across the country, looking into all manner of suspected cult activities and crime.

**Operating Practices**

With the Department still in its infancy, teams of agents usually operate as a single entity, comprised of a small number of agents assigned to a particular location or suspected cult. Cooperation between teams does happen, although given their limited number and the size of the country in which they operate, such joint missions tend to only occur when disparate teams find they are actually investigating the same cult.

Each team of agents has the ability to hire outside expertise on a case-by-case basis, with some experts becoming full-time agents in all but name. Doctors, scientists, religious studies professors and, of course, state and county police, are often sequestered to help Department 29 agents in their work. Sometimes such outside help is unaware of the agents’ true mission, while at other times the experts have to be brought into the loop due to the necessities of a case.

A number of agents have begun to work undercover, attempting to infiltrate suspected cults to gather evidence that is hard to come by from the outside. So far not all the undercover work has gone smoothly. It is not unheard of for

a cult to “turn” an agent, brainwashing them to embrace the cult’s worldview and in so doing effectively gaining a devoted recruit. Such an instance occurred recently when an agent working undercover to infiltrate the Fellowship of Nature’s Salvation was apparently turned. The agent arranged a meet up with his team to review the evidence he had gathered, only to murder all but one of his fellow agents when they arrived.

When apprehended and questioned, the brainwashed agent calmly stated he had been directed to “kill the unbelievers” by Dexter Winward, the cult’s self-styled leader.

**CADUCEUS**

**History**

In 1912, Joshua Meadham of New York City, founder of Meadham Pharmaceuticals, sold the business empire he had built up over the previous thirty years. This was a surprising move, as Meadham had a reputation as a cutthroat businessman, and no one who knew him could imagine him doing anything else with his life.

Meadham took the proceeds of the sale and founded a charitable organization to bring medical care to people affected by epidemics, natural disasters, and wars around the globe. He called this organization _Caduceus_, after the staff of Hermes. While many people incorrectly associate this symbol with medicine (because of its similarity to the rod of Asclepius), Meadham was perfectly aware of its more esoteric meanings.

While Caduceus carries out these charitable works, it has a more secret purpose. In his business dealings, Meadham had a few brushes with the Mythos, most notably in the form of serpent people trying to use the growing global trade in pharmaceuticals as a vehicle to interfere with humanity. Realizing that mankind faced dangers even greater than those Caduceus purports to deal with, Meadham has since used his considerable resources to seek out and combat Mythos menaces where he can, especially where serpent people are involved.

Most of those who work for Caduceus have no knowledge of anything beyond its surface mission. A smaller core team works on the true mission of Caduceus, using the guise of medical aid workers to gain access to dangerous places and carry out missions of assassination, sabotage, and subterfuge against Mythos targets, using the chaos of medical crises to cover their actions.

While it is possible for heroes to join Caduceus as uninitiated medical workers, they should become privy to the inner workings of Caduceus quickly. It may be preferable to bring them into the true mission immediately. Caduceus is always on the lookout for people who have had brushes with the Mythos to help in its work.

Even in its guise as a medical organization, the fact that Caduceus works in dangerous regions means a wide range of skills is required to support its cover operations, let alone its less  
PULP ORGANIZATIONS

**_Caduceus by Jonathan Wyke_**  
public operations. An average Caduceus mission requires doctors, nurses, local experts, negotiators, researchers, armed guards, and people of questionable backgrounds to procure supplies through extra-legal channels. There are few hero professions that could not find some way of fitting into the organization.

**New York Headquarters**

The main operations for Caduceus are based in the Meadham Building on Park Row, on the east side of Manhattan Island. It is currently one of the tallest buildings in New York City, at 18 stories, and is topped by a majestic dome structure and the American flag.

It is here that Caduceus organizes its operations, handles its finances, and carries out various research and training projects in secure laboratories. Security in the building is unusually tight, and most staff are not permitted access to the research laboratories in the lower basements, or the floors where the planning for missions in pursuit of the organization’s real goals takes place—including the top two floors, where Meadham and his inner circle have their offices. Armed security guards are on duty at all times, although most have no idea what Caduceus really is.

Despite this secrecy, most of the building is given over to the innocuous activities of Caduceus’ cover mission, and traveling around these floors will bring the heroes into contact  
with accountants, administrators, lawyers, procurement clerks, and various layers of management. The vast majority of these people have no idea that there is more to Caduceus than meets the eye, although some do have questions about the secure areas of the building, or some of the strange invoices and shipping manifests that end up on their desks.

**_Floors 7–8_**

Once the heroes have been told the true mission of the organization, they are given access to the 7th and 8th floors of the Meadham Building. This is where the real mission planning goes on, and there are walls covered with notes, clippings, maps, old books, and artists’ pads with odd diagrams in them. The team based here track the movements of various Mythos threats, trying to work out their schemes and how to stop them ahead of time. This work involves collating information from news sources and paid informants, as well as research into ancient texts and artifacts. Heroes talking to the staff here are just as likely to encounter people poached from military intelligence, newspaper offices, PI firms, and the halls of academia.

The offices are abuzz with activity, like a busy newsroom, with telephones going off constantly, people shouting questions and answers across the room, and impromptu meetings taking place around desks. The air is thick with cigarette smoke.

While most of the office is open-plan, the senior planners have offices, and there are a small number of meeting rooms. There is also a soundproofed room on the 8th floor where a small group of radio operators stays in touch with the various field teams.

The heroes are given a dedicated handler based here, named Dr. Victor Gomes Goncalves—a Brazilian medical doctor who has worked for Caduceus for 15 years and is part of Meadham’s trusted inner circle of advisors. He handles all briefings and debriefings and acts as a general point of contact for any requests the heroes may have for information, equipment, or funding.

**Note**: _the organization, reach, and work of Caduceus are explored in greater detail in the Pulp Cthulhu campaign_, The Two-Headed Serpent.

KEEPER’S EYES ONLY: EVIL CABALS

**THE AMBROSIA FOUNDATION** The Ambrosia Foundation is on its surface an extremely wealthy, socially progressive, pro-scientific and secularist political organization with a transcontinental reach. It takes its name from the legendary “wine of the gods” of ancient Greek myth, whose transformative powers provided both divine immortality and knowledge. The organization promotes the enhancement and improvement of the human condition and world society through scientific progress. It also champions universal equality over traditional politics and what it deems the “superstitious delusions” of both conventional religion and occultism. Though not widely known to the general public, the Foundation has been active in international academic and educational circles for a number of years where it has acquired something of a mixed reputation: positive through its charitable works, and negative through its adherence and acceptance of much which is regarded as far outside the scientific mainstream.

Beneath the benevolent, if eccentric, exterior of the organization lies a dark secret and a strange design of non human origin, and the Ambrosia Foundation can serve both as patron and peril in _Pulp Cthulhu_ campaigns. Indeed, it can fulfill both roles over time as the heroes uncover the real truth at the heart of the Foundation.

**Stated Purpose and Operations**

The avowed and stated purpose of the Ambrosia Foundation is “The furtherance and improvement of mankind and the pursuit of universal peace and prosperity through scientific advancement and social justice.” A lofty aim and one that

might appeal to many, particularly in academic and scientific circles with liberal and egalitarian leanings; however, beneath this statement is an agenda more complex, subtle, and in fact far more outlandish than first appears. The Foundation’s principle thesis is that science and intellectualism—unbound by the petty restrictions of conventionality and the anchor weights of greed, commerce, nationalism, and superstition—is capable of solving all the ills of a troubled world and heralding in a new Golden Age. The Ambrosia Foundation seeks to bring about such a Golden Age.

To this end, its activities include backing scientific research projects and theorists whose works are so far beyond the accepted wisdom that, for their proponents, conventional sources of funding (and indeed legal protection) would be impossible to acquire. The Foundation often asks nothing in return except for full and frank disclosure of all results and copies of experimental data and where relevant blueprints and prototypes exist, that these be given over to the Foundation. The range of experiments and projects the Ambrosia Foundation is willing to back is breathtaking: be it radical new energy sources, parapsychological research, epidemiology, non-Euclidian mathematics, and for what to all intents and purposes amounts to alchemy. Secondly, and in many ways quite separately, the Foundation operates as a political interest group backed by what appears to be considerable financial resources. Promoting public and private advocacy in favor of its causes, (and against fundamentalist religion and occultism), the Ambrosia Foundation is slowly extending its network of contacts and acquiring influence in an increasing number of selected scientific and legal institutions, as well as social charities across the globe. In this guise the Foundation sponsors secular charities that provide education or nourishment for the poor, provide generous scholarships for technical and scientific subjects, and funds literacy and numeracy projects. With these latter activities, the Foundation has fostered more good will than it might otherwise have done with a number of local authorities and institutions. This work has set the organization at odds with several political interests and traditional institutions, particularly in the U.S., where some have leveled accusations of communistic ideology at the Foundation, which it has vociferously denied.

**Organization**

The structure and organization of the Ambrosia Foundation are both complex and somewhat opaque to outsiders. It does not actively court new members to swell its ranks (although it is more than happy to add any interested parties to its mailing lists and direct volunteers to its contact organizations), nor does it actively seek monetary donations (neatly avoiding the scrutiny such activities naturally attract). It acts most often through a series of representatives, often lawyers and technical agents, who are based out of a series of well-appointed and thoroughly conventional offices in a number of major cities  
PULP ORGANIZATIONS

worldwide, most notably in the U.S. These offices, in turn, act as hubs and communication centers for the Foundation’s activities, hiring and contracting further services and professionals as needed: from printing and distributing free school books to bulk purchasing industrial chemicals, and providing oversight and logistical support for any projects they are backing—scientific or social—in their broad geographical area. The Foundation’s local offices are individually headed by a general manager (themselves often with some kind of legal, scientific, or technical background) who is, it may be noticed, rarely native to the local area or indeed country in which the office is kept. These general managers, in turn, report to… Well there’s the question that anybody who starts to look into the Ambrosia Foundation will eventually reach, and will likely hit dead silence.

Considerable digging may amass certain facts and suppositions, particularly in regard to the Foundation’s seemingly bottomless pool of wealth (the details of which cannot be entirely concealed). The organization’s financial origins appear to lie in a number of sizable mineral extraction and petrochemical concerns, particularly in South America and sub-Saharan Africa (in which the Foundation is a major investor). Some idea of the Ambrosia Foundation’s scope can also be gleaned from thorough investigation: it has public offices in Washington D.C., San Francisco, Texas, Montreal, Lima, Buenos Aires, London, Lisbon, Zurich, Accra, Pretoria, and Salisbury (Southern Rhodesia). From these, the Foundation continues to extend an almost invisible web of influence and patronage without ever coming fully to the public attention. It is a web without a visible center (or indeed a spider).

**History**

The history of the Ambrosia Foundation and its origins remain shrouded in mystery and what is known cannot be readily confirmed by concrete sources. Its open statements on the matter begin and largely end with the information that it was, “Founded some years ago by a number of philanthropic individuals, some of which were scientists and thinkers, and others who were captains of industry, who wished selflessly to see the fruits of their labors benefit mankind and free the generations to come from the chains of ignorance and superstition.” These founders remain anonymous; even in the Foundation’s own literature.

The organization seems to have sprung up, almost fully formed, in the U.S. and South America, in the very early part of the twentieth century, not long after war began to rage in Europe. In this, the Ambrosia Foundation had something in common (at least superficially) with a number of other progressive and pacifist societies which developed in reaction to the industrialized carnage of the war. From the beginning, it professed an emphasis on science and technology, which marked it out from the crop and has clearly outlived many  
of its contemporaries. It has continued to expand, opening international offices in the years since. It has only had a handful of public successes and failures associated with it, the majority of the scientific projects it has backed going largely unpublished and unpublicized. Despite such lack of publicity, its notoriety in academic circles is growing, particularly in the U.S.

The Ambrosia Foundation has also come to the attention of such interested parties as the FBI and the U.S. State Department, although they see it as being very far from a pressing concern. The organization’s willingness to fund fringe, esoteric scientific theories and controversial and outlandish experiments makes it a desirable patron to scientific outcasts and revolutionaries alike—not least of all pulp heroes—just as its reputation among more conventional academic and scientific institutions makes it a laughing stock for some, and a source of more sinister rumors for others.

**The Secret Truth**

The entirety of the Ambrosia Foundation is a deliberate artifice. A confection created and controlled by a single abominable and inhuman intelligence, an entity that refers to itself as the Shard. Once a member of that time-unbounded order of life known to some as the Great Race of Yith, the Shard was considered insane and perverted among its exalted kind and convicted of strange crimes beyond human understanding. The Shard’s psychic entity was mutilated by its fellows, who cast it down but found they could not reliably destroy it. Instead, they stole from it much of its identity and ability to project itself through time. Once this was accomplished, they imprisoned it in a period of Earth’s history caught on a knife edge of utter destruction—by forces they hoped would prove capable of finishing the job of annihilating the Shard’s being—a period known to its human inhabitants as the twentieth century. Deathless but disembodied, its former powers and vast time transcending knowledge in tatters, the exiled entity has nevertheless formed a plan to escape what it sees as a prison akin to a crumbling dungeon on the precipice of an abyss.

The Shard means to leave the Earth, and indeed the solar system, doomed (as it sees them) to ultimate destruction by terrifying cosmic forces as readily as the mammalian primitives who live in ignorance of the true order of things. Those same primitives, whose bodies the Shard is forced to wear, will be used to fashion an agency to facilitate the Shard’s escape. Before that can be done, however, the humans must first be honed, improved, and made serviceable in body and in mind. Resources must be gathered, machinery and materials developed to aid the ultimate aim of escaping this terrestrial prison. Ultimately, the Shard wishes to find a world and fashion it in its own image.

Secrecy has been a paramount concern. The Shard fears discovery, not simply by humanity (as this would ultimately prove at worse an inconvenience), but by other non-human entities and agencies that move through the shadows of the Earth. It fears the Old Ones and their by-blows (a factor which lies at the root of the Foundation’s anti-occult stance), just as it fears the ignorant bungling of humanity will hasten the very doomsday it seeks to escape. To this end, the Shard has spun the web of the Ambrosia Foundation. With it the Shard has been seeking out the suitable minds and bodies, guiding and molding them to its own ends. Meanwhile, it clouds the true building blocks of science and technology with a smokescreen of pseudo-science and irrelevant dead-ends that serve no other purpose than to cover its tracks.

Given its para-human levels of intelligence and fragmented but still powerful psychic abilities, it has been all too easy for the Shard to remain the “ghost in the machine” within the Ambrosia Foundation. It has already worn a dozen faces; its innate paranoia moving it from body to body between the management of the Foundation to preserve its anonymity. While not actively malevolent in an understandable way, the Shard is utterly ruthless, viewing mankind much as a farmer might view the animals in a farmyard: dumb creatures which might be trained to do useful tasks or to provide sustenance, but to be slaughtered when they have outlived their usefulness. When it departs the Earth it may take some of these useful animals with it, albeit altered in some way to better survive the passage. As for the Earth itself, the Shard cares not if its nations must ultimately be made to topple and the survivors

made to bow down before it, or if it is left a burning cinder in its wake—either is acceptable as long as the Shard can effect an escape.

**Using the Ambrosia Foundation**

The Ambrosia Foundation can prove both an attractive direct patron to pulp heroes, as well as a more casual source of adventuring opportunities: from experiments-gone wrong to appeals for help and paid commissions in tracking down missing scientists, obtaining strange artifacts or weird inventions, investigating unusual goings-on related to the scientific community and weird phenomena—the Ambrosia Foundation is interested in it all such matters and has very deep pockets.

The power at the heart of the Foundation is also ever alert for entities and conspiracies it considers to be a threat, directly or indirectly. It views using a third party—such as the heroes—as a perfectly suitable and disposable tool for further investigation and direct action.

As an enemy, the Ambrosia Foundation is very dangerous and ultimately very hard to tackle. It is no mere cult or criminal gang but a multi-national hydra with dozens of offices and hundreds of employees. Beyond its everyday resources, it also possesses a myriad of contacts, hidden caches of weird science and bizarre weaponry, and is backed with almost unlimited  
PULP ORGANIZATIONS

funds. It can, if it chooses, attack the heroes both through violence and also through wielding the levers of legal and political influence against them. As a legitimate charitable foundation, it enjoys a degree of public protection the average dark cult or secret society couldn’t dream of. Worse yet for the heroes, the vast majority of those employed by the Ambrosia Foundation are entirely innocent, normal human beings, utterly unaware of the power or the design they are serving. The only vague defense the heroes might have is the Foundation’s desire for its more extreme actives to remain out of the public eye and to avoid outright scandal. If the foundation comes to view the heroes as a direct threat, then they face a dire peril indeed. There is only one sure way of defeating the Ambrosia Foundation in outright conflict— cutting the head off the snake (or Shard, as it were)—but that will likely prove a nightmarishly difficult proposition.

_Suggested statistics for the Shard can be found in **Chapter 9: Pulp Villains and Characters**, page 130_.

**THE GRAY TIGERS**

The Gray Tigers (A.K.A. The Gray Tiger Hunt and the Gray Tiger Old Fellows) are an infamous group of big-game hunters, trackers, and sometime explorers of the kind that give their ilk a bad name. Their reputation is for hunting the most dangerous and rare of game, and for doing so in the most hazardous and forlorn corners of the world—caring little for how much blood is spilled or how much damage is caused in the process. They hunt for their own pleasure and also for profit. The cabal at the heart of this loose organization often funds its own blood sport by arranging hunts for the rich and decadent—satisfaction guaranteed (so the rumor goes)—whether the desired quarry has four legs or two.

**The Heart of Darkness**

At the center of the self-styled “Gray Tigers” are a score of savage and brutal men. Men for whom hunting and killing has become an addiction. These men do not merely hunt beasts, such as the lion and the bear, or even human prey (although this too has long been part of the group’s activities); their keen desire is to hunt monsters—a most dangerous game indeed. The Gray Tigers know the forgotten reaches of the world harbor terrors undreamt of; they have witnessed the wreckage left in the wake of such creatures, and the strange signs of their passing. A few of their number have encountered such entities and lived to tell the tale, returning “twisted” by the experience. To find and hunt such monsters has become the fever dream of the Gray Tigers and, in this, they have begun an inexorable shift from human evil to something much worse. The Gray Tigers have looked into the abyss and found the abyss staring back at them.  
**History**

The Gray Tigers owe their origin to a trio of hunters who gathered in Shanghai, in 1912, for the pursuit of the big cat which gives them their name. This animal, deemed no more than a myth by some, and often called the Maltese Tiger (owing to its supposed coloration), first came to prominence after claims by an American missionary and big game hunter named Harry Chapman Adams. Adams professed to have seen such a creature in the wild country of the Fujian province of China in 1911\. Long before Adams had published the account in a later book, the stories of the tiger had made their rounds throughout the colonial barrooms and legation houses, firing the imagination of would-be hunters, young and old. Several expeditions were mounted into the densely forested mountains in search of the animal, but the survivors returned empty handed. One such party comprised three particularly jaded and ill-reputed hunters: “Captain” Caleb Lusk (a former U.S. Marine sharpshooter), Englishman Simon Lagrange (a tiger hunter and old India hand), and a wealthy German ex-mercenary, Dominik Rost. Bankrolled by Rost, whose wealth was reputed to have been bloodstained plunder taken in the aftermath of the Boxer Rebellion, their expedition, mounted in late summer, was well provisioned, well organized, and well armed. It was attended by a dozen bearers and several local guides and was undertaken with the consent of the local nobility (who were bribed to ensure safe passage through their territory).

Investigations later carried out by the colonial authorities uncovered evidence that the Rost party had continued a fruitless hunt for several months, with Rost himself growing increasingly hostile towards the Chinese peasantry and local hunters they encountered as they progressed further and further off the beaten track. Evidence suggests that after an altercation at a Buddhist wayside shrine, the expedition was directed to a secluded and shunned area known locally as the Valley of the Hungry Winds, where they would find “The gray beasts that hunt soon enough.” What followed cannot be confirmed, but only one of the party, Caleb Lusk, would be seen again. Eight weeks later he blundered, raving, badly injured, and half-starved, into a Jesuit mission some one-hundred-miles southwest of his party’s last known sighting. It would be almost a full year before Lusk recovered enough to aid an official inquiry into the missing party, but, in his fever, he claimed to remember nothing of what had come to pass in the Valley of the Hungry Winds. The inquiry returned an open verdict and the matter was widely ascribed to the actions of animals and bandits, while others quietly whispered that, alone in the wilderness, the three had finally given into their natures and turned upon each other.

Lusk, now fearsomely scarred and blinded in one eye, became a notorious figure in East Asia, seemingly possessed of a second and furiously vital lease on life. He founded a company named the Gray Tiger Hunt; its name perversely playing on the tragedy he had endured and the dark fame it had earned him. For the Gray Tigers, no hunt was too dangerous, no hunting ground

**_The Gray Tigers by Richard Pace_**  
forbidden, so long as the right price was met. In the two decades since, the Hunt has operated across the world and its ranks have swollen to a core group of perhaps twenty “old fellows” who share Lusk’s dark passion for blood sport against deadly prey, and its clientele has ranged from the debauched sons of the nouveau riche to jaded royalty. Lusk is still its undisputed master, showing no signs of slowing down or loss of his strange and feverish vitality despite now being in his late sixties (by even a generous estimation), while the Gray Tigers’ reputation has grown increasingly more sinister and malign.

**Operations**

The Gray Tigers operate on the fringes of civilized society, both as mercenary hunt masters for hire and to engage in dark hunts of their own design. Such activities can range from the indiscriminate slaughter of game animals without license (not to mention any natives that get in the way) to manhunts where human prey is deliberately hunted—and they don’t care which so long as the price is right. In this regard they have no care for morality or the law, ensuring that such activities take place far from potential discovery or retribution. To this end, the Gray Tigers usually take on various specialists and local lackeys drawn from the worst elements of the area, whose services can be cheaply bought, while one or two of their own number act to oversee and run the show.

In the case of their own hunts, they pursue and pay well for stories and evidence of strange creatures (including those of myth and legend)—the more dangerous and deadly, the better. These things they hunt to kill, both as the ultimate thrill and, as Lusk has shown his inner circle, for the power and the vitality this can bring. So far, some terrible successes in these goals have been met. In the jungles of East Africa, they hunted and exterminated a hidden colony of intelligent carnivorous white apes in the ruins of a nameless fallen city. In the aftermath, the Gray Tigers, under Lusk’s direction, devoured the apes, taking from them their nightmarish ivory idols and bloody gemstones as trophies. In the Urals, they stalked and slew a half-lizard, half-insect beast that was a terror of local legend (though it cost them a dozen lives to do so). While on a forlorn island in the South Pacific, several of their number fought a walking corpse-thing that had fingernails like glass daggers. The thing came from beneath the sea and was propitiated by the folk of the islands with the blood of the young to stave off its wrath. The Gray Tigers trapped it and had to resort to burning it to ash before being driven away by a frenzied mob of local fishermen. The inhabitants of the region later paid the price for the outsiders’ hunt when a sudden and lethal plague swept the region, savaging the human inhabits of a dozen nearby islands. The Gray Tigers have also lost entire expeditions without a trace, including a group who journeyed deep into forests of New Zealand on the trail of the legendry Maero, and another that set forth upon the sands of the Gobi Desert in search of the Olgoi-khorkhoi. The survivors of one expedition into the high Carpathians returned to Budapest, bewildered and raving, only to be found later, torn apart in their rooms behind locked doors.

Lusk and his coterie’s unquenchable blood lust in the face of creatures beyond their knowledge courts disaster, and it is only a matter of time before their desire to hunt the deadliest of all prey will see them disturb something their guns and explosives cannot hope to counter or kill. The world may ultimately pay the price for their folly. As for Lusk himself, he is no longer altogether human; the things he has seen and done have marred his mind and spirit, while the flesh he has tasted has begun to work its own changes on his body.

**Using the Gray Tigers**

The Gray Tigers make great antagonists for pulp heroes whose adventures take them to the ends of the Earth and into the dark hearts of jungles and deserts. In this, they can serve both as direct enemies, unwelcome and decidedly unwholesome rivals, or even as very reluctantly accepted allies when the chips are down and the fate of the world is at stake. They are, after all, very good at what they do and are suicidally fearless.

The Gray Tigers’ public reputation is entirely unwholesome, yet the true depth of their crimes is largely unknown. No one has uncovered the truth about Lusk, although his innermost circle is starting to suspect. As well as their lethal skills and brutal immorality, it is the Gray Tigers’ ignorance that ultimately may prove their most dangerous quality. Their knowledge of the truth of the Mythos is actually woefully small and they are, quite simply, playing with fire. Whether drawn like sharks to the scent of blood on the trail of monsters, hired as hunters, or as bodyguards for some deranged madman with a hidden agenda, who knows what catastrophe they might unleash?

_Suggested statistics for “Captain” Caleb Lusk can be found in **Chapter 9: Pulp Villains and Characters**, page 131\._

**THE INHERITORS**

The Inheritors is a powerful and deadly doomsday cult devoted to unleashing the Old Ones’ reign over the Earth. A relative newcomer, but rapidly growing in menace, they operate as a murderous secret society devoted to catastrophe and death. Its members lead double lives—like a dark mirror to every myth, conspiracy theory and fanciful story told about groups such as the Rosicrucians, the Knights Templar, and the Theosophist movement—except every whispered horror that might be leveled against them is likely true and worse besides. Their principle ritual is murder, their credo is chaos, and their delight is in disaster.

If they are not stopped they will end the world.  
**Cult Beliefs**

Their principle goal is nothing less than bringing about the end of the world. This insanity is predicated on the belief that the extinction of mankind is inevitable, as one day the stars will be right and the Old Ones will wake from their slumbers to lay waste to all. When that day comes it is they who will become its inheritors, becoming transfigured and blessed into a new form more suited to the endless age of nightmare that will follow (or so they believe).

The cult finds evidence for their belief in certain cryptic passages of the _Necromonicon_ and other forbidden and blasphemous works, including a suppressed Georgian occult treatise called _The Inheritance of the Kingdom_. They believe that by hastening this end they will be rewarded, and see occult significance in the steady worsening of the human condition. Poverty, war, hardship, famine, catastrophe, and disaster, both natural and man-made, are the trumpet blasts heralding a new age of wanton destruction and the return the Old Ones. The cult encourages greed, spite, and ruthless violence among its members—to be practiced in their daily lives—calling these things “freedom.” It sees nothing but virtue in its own members rising to the top and acquiring temporal power and wealth on the broken backs of their fellow man.

Such knowledge of the Mythos that the cult’s rank-and file members possess is a garbled and incoherent mess, filled with half-truths and lies handed down the ranks, and most of its initiates cannot comprehend the nature of the forces they serve, believing them to be more traditionally “Satanic” or mythological in nature rather than alien and uncaring. Such displays of genuinely otherworldly power performed by the cult’s masters—including lesser creatures of the Mythos summoned to make grisly feasts of human sacrifices, or to destroy those that stand in the cult’s way—have made true believers of those initiates selected because they carry a stain of evil in their hearts or a touch of madness in their minds. Participation in indiscriminate or ritualistic murder is used to bind the cult’s members in dark brotherhood against the world. Loyalty is further ensured by fear of retribution for any failure or transgression.

**Organization**

The Inheritors is an organization believing in a creed of secrecy and terror. Its present incarnation, which has taken root foremost in New York and Chicago, has taken on a number of deliberate trapping and modes of operation borrowed from the likes of the Klu Klux Klan and the Chicago Mob. It has formed itself into a number of cell-like groups it refers to as “Covens,” each of which takes on a lurid name such as the “Killing Hand” or the “Carrion Crows,” with a symbol to match. Each coven is made up of a circle of initiates led by a master. Below them are the rank and file of the cult’s minions—known as “the worms”—who do the coven’s bidding in hopes of proving their loyalty and receiving the eventual

THE INHERITANCE OF THE KINGDOM Its authorship marked only by a crimson “X” upon modern copies of this book, _The Inheritance of the Kingdom_ serves as a dark bible for the cult. The tome purports to be of early eighteenth century English origin from a handwritten and previously unreproduced manuscript. It is a viperous and bitter polemic, advocating the freedom inherent in avarice, bloodshed, and savagery; praising the “true gods” and the

bounty they promise to those who unleash them. The work is singled out by being peppered with horrific “experiments in agony,” which it advocates be performed upon the reader’s fellow man to “strengthen the soul and become more alike unto the gods by indulging in such appetites as they own.” True scholars of the Mythos find the work a fabric of half-truths and bitter lies, threaded through with dangerously intact rituals and twisted passages culled from works such as the Dee edition of the _Necromonicon_, and the 17th century English translation of the _Mysteries of the Worm_, reused and altered for the author’s own ends.

**_The Inheritance of the Kingdom_**

When a coven meets to perform rituals or carry out its attacks, the member’s identities are always concealed from each other and their victims by sinister masks entirely covering their faces. The nature of these masks may vary from coven to coven, from black executioners’ hoods to bloodstained sackcloth. Such concealment when carrying out the cult’s business is, to them, sacrosanct and failure to use a mask is a crime punishable by a painful death. As for the masters of the covens, they hold complete authority of life and death over the cult’s lesser members, while they themselves live only at the pleasure of the cult’s master, the head of its most powerful New York coven, an individual known as “The Slaughter.”  
The Inheritors is a cult that has only recently come to light in the last few years, although its name has become known to several watchers of occult affairs. Police authorities across the eastern U.S. know of “The Inheritors” as a name linked to a series of bloody but as yet not apparently connected crimes. These include a railroad heist in Philadelphia in which a number of privately-owned antiquities were stolen and several guards killed, and a later gun battle in an illegal gambling club in Atlantic City which left six dead, and allegedly resulted in another five individuals connected with organized crime being kidnapped and never seen again. The worst incident connected to the cult by name involved a customs raid on a warehouse in Providence, which uncovered the remains of a yet unknown number of persons (believed to be missing transients from the region) jumbled up with an unknown number of unidentified animal corpses. The bones, for the most part, were in a mutilated and partially-dissolved condition, making complete identification and accounting impossible. Three masked men were killed resisting arrest at the scene. A police officer was also fatally injured and later died, while two others had to be treated for what the official report records as “shock and the traumatic effects of the inhalation of chemical fumes.” Strangely attired, hooded or masked perpetrators have also been witnessed in a string of other crimes in the Eastern States over the last several years, including a lethal tenement fire on the Southside of Chicago, a string of ritualistic murders in rural New Jersey, and a series of break-ins and art thefts committed with a remarkable level of violence in several major cities. This is merely the tip of the iceberg. In response, various District Attorney’s offices—as well as the FBI’s Department 29—are actively looking into the existence of a masked killer cult operating in the Eastern U.S. So far the respectable press has been kept away from the story and the separate investigations have gone nowhere.

**Goals and Operations**

The Slaughter’s ultimate plans are to conduct a series of rituals to break down the walls of reality and free the Old Ones and their servants to walk the earth, ushering in the apocalypse. To this end, he and the coven masters have been expanding the cult’s numbers, preparing ritual sites for use (primarily by bloody rites of consecration), and seeking to acquire artifacts and instruments of power to increase The Inheritors’ reach and abilities. Additionally, the cult conducts more mundane but often no less criminal expansions: stockpiling weapons and explosives, establishing safe houses, and muscling in on the underworld to provide a ready supply of victims and money. The masters also quest to acquire more Mythos lore  
PULP ORGANIZATIONS

for their own use—New England being a prime resource for this—and seek knowledge of how to bind and summon entities of the Mythos to their control. They are pursuing such activities by the only means they believe in: murder, blackmail, torture, and robbery. The Inheritors’ plans are evolving and they have already set their sights on Arkham, with its secrets and treasure-troves of forbidden books, as well as what can be gleaned from desolated Innsmouth, along with several established occult groups to plunder and destroy in the coming days. Soon The Slaughter will direct the first of the great rituals of sundering, opening the way to the horrors from beyond. The sites of these nightmarish acts will not be some forsaken desert or wind-blasted wilderness hill, but in the hearts of the great metropolises of America.

**Using the Inheritors**

The Inheritors depicted here is a deliberate example of an “evil” cult in the adventure pulp tradition, rather than the somewhat more subtle iterations represented in most classic _Call of Cthulhu_ campaigns. Here the trope is played right down to the Grand Guignol repertoire of horrors, a megalomaniac mastermind to match wits with, and a horde of masked killers with bloody axes and submachine guns for your pulp heroes to fight. They are, of course, out to destroy the world. The Inheritors are shown

here as an emerging threat; a monster only just starting to rear its head out of the shadows to menace the public and keep the forces of law and order awake at night shivering in dread of what they might do next.

Deliberately, The Slaughter has been left as something of an empty framework for the Keeper to fill out. Depending on just how high-pulp the campaign is, he can be played as an out and-out sorcerous super-villain, a previously unknown “Mask of Nyarlathotep” spawned by the industrial age, or a more subtle but entirely human mastermind spoken of in whispers, whose power is felt rather than seen. This latter option can lead to finding and unmasking him as the arch-villain—a particularly satisfying conclusion to a story arc within your campaign (especially if it turns out to be a long-standing NPC the players didn’t suspect\!) Likewise, the organization is not presented as worshipers of a particular Old One, or their direct servants, but rather they are enamored of the insane idea of forcibly bringing forth the whole nightmarish mess of the Mythos to tread the Earth. It’s worth remembering that to the long-term devotees of the Mythos powers, or those bloodlines and beings touched for generations by their taint, that The Inheritors’ schemes might be as much anathema to them as to the forces of sanity, reviled as dangerous upstarts, meddlers, thieves, and blasphemers to be destroyed.

# CONDITIONS

1 **Amnesia:** the hero ceases to think of him or herself as a hero, losing the ability to use his or her pulp talents for 1D10 rounds.

2 **Crazy plan:** for 1D10 rounds the hero pursues an irrational or ill-conceived plan. The plan must either benefit the enemy’s situation or increase the danger for the hero or his or her allies.

3 **Rage:** a red mist descends on the hero and he or she explodes in a spree of uncontrolled violence and destruction directed at their surroundings, allies, or foes alike for 1D10 rounds.

4 **Gloat:** the hero is compelled to boast, gloat, or exclaim their plans aloud for 1D10 rounds: “So, before my friends and I wipe out every ghoul in this lair, just let me tell you this…”

5 **Relax:** the hero is convinced that the threat is negligible, and he or she sits back and relaxes for 1D10 rounds. They might take a minute to light a nice cigar or make a toast with a hip flask.

6 **Flee in panic:** the hero is compelled to get as far away as possible by whatever means are available, even if it necessitates them taking the only vehicle and leaving everyone else behind. They travel for 1D10 rounds.

7 **Show off:** the hero becomes an attention-seeking maniac for 1D10 rounds, possibly prone to foolhardy acts.

8 **Alter ego:** the hero’s personality undergoes a complete transformation and is replaced by one completely different for 1D10 rounds. The alter ego is a mirror opposite of the hero. Where one is kind, the other is callous. Where one is selfish the other is altruistic. This could be used by the Keeper to foreshadow the monster this particular hero will become if he or she ever descends into permanent insanity.

9 **Phobia:** the hero gains a new phobia. Roll 1D100 on the **Sample Phobias Table** (Chapter 9: Sanity, page 160, _Call of Cthulhu Rulebook_), or the Keeper may choose one. Even if the source of the phobia is not present, the investigator imagines it is there for the next 1D10 rounds.

10 **Mania:** the hero gains a new mania. Roll 1D100 on the **Sample Manias Table** (Chapter 9: Sanity, page 161, _Call of Cthulhu Rulebook_), or the Keeper may choose one. The investigator seeks to indulge in their new mania for the next 1D10 rounds.

Most of the outcomes require the hero to leave the place where the onset of insanity occurs. If this is not possible, the Keeper should adapt the outcome accordingly. If there is a chance that another hero might hear or see the insane hero leaving, they should be given a chance to intervene. If the insane hero is confronted by another hero before their bout of madness is over, the Keeper should hand control of the insane hero back to the player at that moment, allowing the players to roleplay the scene. This may mean that the intended outcome is cut short.

1 **Amnesia:** the hero comes to their senses in some unfamiliar place, with no memory of who they are and lacking any of their pulp talents. Their memories slowly return to them over time. Their pulp talents only return in a time of crisis. In this case, a crisis is defined as someone’s life being endangered. When someone’s life is threatened, the hero should make a Luck roll; if successful, their talents return. If unsuccessful they may try again in 1D10 rounds.

2 **Robbed:** the hero comes to their senses 1D10 hours later, having been robbed. They are unharmed. If they were carrying a Treasured Possession (per their backstory), make a Luck roll to see if it was stolen. Everything else of value is automatically missing.

3 **Battered:** the hero comes to their senses 1D10 hours later to find themselves battered and bruised. Hit points are reduced to half of what they were before going insane. They have not been robbed. How the damage was sustained is up to the Keeper.

4 **Violence:** the hero explodes in a spree of violence and destruction. When the hero comes to their senses, their actions may or may not be apparent or remembered. Who or what the hero has inflicted violence upon, and whether they have killed or only inflicted harm, is up to the Keeper.

5 **Ideology/Beliefs:** review the hero’s backstory entry for Ideology and Beliefs. The hero manifests one of these in an extreme, crazed, and demonstrative manner. A common outcome is some variant of megalomania, whereby the hero’s talents and beliefs begin to corrupt their humanity and sense of right and wrong.

6 **Significant People:** consult the hero’s backstory entry for Significant People and why the relationship is so important. In the time that passes (1D10 hours or more) the hero has done their best to get close to that person and act upon their relationship in some way.

7 **Institutionalized or apprehended:** the hero comes to their senses in a high-security psychiatric ward or police cell. They may slowly recall the events that led them there.

8 **Flee in panic:** when the hero comes to their senses, they are far away. They should be relocated somewhere appropriate and noteworthy, perhaps at the top of the Empire State Building, in the White House, or deep inside a military headquarters. How they reached the location is unknown to them.

9 **Phobia:** the hero gains a new phobia. Roll 1D100 on the **Sample Phobias Table** (Chapter 9: Sanity, page 160, _Call of Cthulhu Rulebook_), or the Keeper may choose one. The hero comes to their senses 1D10 hours later, having taken every precaution to avoid their new phobia.

10 **Mania:** the hero gains a new mania. Roll 1D100 on the **Sample Manias Table** (Chapter 9: Sanity, page 161, _Call of Cthulhu Rulebook_), or the Keeper may choose one. The hero comes to their senses 1D10 hours later. During this bout of madness, the hero will have been fully indulging in their new mania. Whether this is apparent to other people is up to the Keeper and player.

1 **Insane strength**: “I draw upon untold reserves of inner strength\!” Gain a bonus die to a STR roll. If the roll is failed, something goes wrong. The Keeper chooses: either the hero is injured (take 1D3 \+ the hero’s damage bonus in damage from torn muscles and the like), or the thing that the hero was working on breaks.

2 **Insane dexterity:** “My hands move quicker than the eye can see\!” Gain a bonus die to a DEX roll. If the roll is failed, something goes wrong. The Keeper chooses: either the hero is injured (take 1D4 hit points of damage), or they break the thing that they were working on.

3 **Insane power:** “I can feel the power flowing through me\!” Gain a bonus die to a POW roll. If the roll is failed, something goes wrong. The Keeper chooses: either the hero passes out, or the effect they were trying to achieve is dangerously greater than intended.

4 **Insane constitution:** “I grit my teeth and feel no pain\!” When an amount of damage is suffered, the hero may choose to make a CON roll. If successful, they bear the pain and halve the damage. If the roll is failed, they take the damage that was rolled and fall to the ground, incapacitated for 1D3 rounds.

5 **Insane appearance:** “Damn, I look good baby\!” The hero looks somehow very different; this may be purely in their facial expression and posture, or it could be that they take the time to change their clothes and hair to something radically different (clothes don’t magically change—they must do that). Gain a bonus die to an APP roll or roll that could be affected by their appearance, such as Charm or Fast Talk. The effect is short-lived but may be applied to all interactions during a period of time, such as one scene or one meeting. If a roll is failed using the bonus die for their “improved” appearance, they suffer some form of social disgrace or consequence.

6 **Insane recall:** “I remember everything perfectly\!” Every memory and fact the hero ever heard is right at their fingertips. Faces, figures, and details crowd their mind in a flood of information. Gain a bonus die to an EDU, Know, or skill roll when trying to remember information that the hero might feasibly have once heard or seen. If a roll is failed, the flood of information is too much\! Lose a point of Sanity and

suffer a bout of madness. If the hero was not already insane, they are now temporarily insane.

7 **Insane speed:** “Look at me—I’m faster than a speeding bullet\!” When entering a chase, the hero takes a bonus die on their CON roll to determine their movement speed. If the roll succeeds, increase their speed by 1\. If the roll is an Extreme success, increase their speed by 2\. If the roll is failed, they blunder somehow, losing at least 1D3 rounds of movement.

8 **Insane driver:** “Nothing’s going to stop me now\!” Gain a bonus die to all the hero’s Drive rolls for one chase. Should a drive roll fail, they lose control of the vehicle somehow (at the Keeper’s discretion).

9 **Insane language:** “Nope, never had a Swahili lesson in my life, but how difficult can it be?” The hero gains a temporary grasp of all modern languages—or one archaic or Mythos language—for a short time. This effect lasts long enough to conduct an initial reading of a tome, conduct a conversation, or listen to a speech. The effective skill in the language is 75%. Should a skill roll be required for the use of the new language, a failed roll means the hero forgets their native tongue for 1D6 days, replacing it with the new language that was being used at the time.

10 **Insane accuracy:** “Seems like I just can’t miss\!” The hero gains a bonus die to all Firearms rolls until their gun is empty. They may continue to use the bonus die until one of their shots misses its target or they run out of bullets. That missed shot will hit something they do not want it to hit—an ally or something else of great value, dealing damage as if it had been an Extreme success (impale).

11 **Insanely intimidating:** “You think I’m funny? Funny how?” The hero gains a bonus die to Intimidate rolls. If a roll is failed, they lose control of their actions for a short time. The Keeper chooses what happens: either they fly into a violent rage (possibly causing damage to the person they’re speaking with), or they are belittled and shamed.

12 **Insanely hard to hit:** “Float like a butterfly\!” The hero gains a bonus die on all Dodge rolls in the current combat scene until they fail a Dodge roll. Such a failure indicates moving into the blow, in which case they receive damage as if the attack had achieved an Extreme success.

13 **Insane sense of direction:** “Follow me, it’s down here\!” The hero’s player tells the Keeper where they want to go or what they want to head towards. The Keeper gives the direction they should take in order to accomplish this. The hero makes a Luck roll: if the roll is failed, they walk straight into a trap or dangerous encounter of some kind.

14 **Insane understanding:** “Oh, I get it now\!” The hero’s player may ask the Keeper a question about the plot: _“Why is the enemy doing…?” “What does the enemy hope to achieve by…?” “What is the best thing that we could do the thwart the enemy’s plan?” What is the enemy’s greatest weakness?_ The question should be quite specific and the Keeper should answer honestly. This talent can only be used once—it is then lost.

15 **Insane vision**: “Light? Who needs light?” The hero gains a bonus die to a Spot Hidden roll. Even in complete darkness, they get to make a roll as if it were twilight. If the roll is failed, the Keeper decides the outcome: either their eyes become painful and overly sensitive (effectively leaving them blind for 1D10 rounds) or they suffer delusions for the next hour.

16 **Insane hearing**: “Quiet everyone, what’s that ticking?” The hero gains a bonus die to a Listen roll. Regardless of ambient noise or other sounds, they are able to pick up on even the quietest of sounds. If the roll is failed, the Keeper decides what happens: either some sudden noise leaves them deaf for 1D10 minutes, or they have auditory delusions for the next hour.

17 **Insane stealth**: “You ain’t seen me, right?” The hero gains a bonus die to a Stealth roll. They move with catlike grace and might even attempt to hide in plain sight. If the roll is failed, they accidentally break something or cause a great deal of commotion.

18 **Insane brutality**: “I’m gonna chop you into tiny pieces\!” The hero rolls all melee damage twice and takes the highest result. The downside is that once they start hitting, they cannot stop\! They must continue until they deliver a killing blow. The only two things that will stop this is if they are either rendered unconscious or someone successfully makes a Hard Fast Talk, Charm, or Intimidate roll on them (only one person may attempt one of these on the hero in any one combat round).

19-20 **Insane skill augmentation**: “You think I’m crazy don’t you? But it’s possible I tell you\!” As a side effect of insanity, a hero can augment one of their skills (of the player’s choice, agreed by the Keeper) with some aspect of the Cthulhu Mythos. This will affect the scope of what can be achieved with the skill. Herbert West and Crawford Tillinghast are both good candidates for case studies on how this might affect a person.
